= mongo_odm

Flexible persistence module for any Ruby class to MongoDB.

= Why another ODM for MongoDB?

 * Fully compatible with Rails 3
 * Use the Mongo ruby driver when possible (query syntax, cursors, indexes management...)
 * Allow lazy loading of collections and queries nesting (concatenation of 'find' calls) to emulate ActiveRecord 3
 * No association methods (for now): Just declare your own methods on models to fetch the related items
 * Give support for dirty objects, validations, etc. through ActiveModel 3
 * Automanage type conversions and default values
 * Keep it as simple as possible
 
= Basics

Other Mongo ODMs don't require to explicitly define the possible schema of a model. I think this is necessary to help with type conversions (instanciate the right class for each attribute, and convert them to a Mongo compatible type when persisted). But it's also possible to fill attributes with valid Mongo values without defining them as fields, and only the attributes whose values are different than the default values are stored as part of the document when saved.

A piece of code is better than a hundred of words:

  # Establish connection; it uses localhost:27017 and database 'test' if not specified
  MongoODM.config = {:host => 'localhost', :port => 27017, :database => "my_tests"}

  class Shape
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :name
    field :x, Float, :default => 0.0
    field :y, Float, :default => 0.0
  end
  
  shape = Shape.new(:name => "Point", :x => 0, :y => 5)
  shape.save
  
  # Saves:
  # { "_id"    : ObjectId("4be97178715dd2c4be000006"),
  #   "_class" : "Shape",
  #   "x"      : 0,
  #   "y"      : 5,
  #   "color"  : null,
  #   "name"   : "Point"
  # }
  
  class Circle < Shape # This items are stored on the 'shapes' collection
    field :radius, Float, :default => 1.0
  end
  
  circle = Circle.new.save
  
  # Saves:
  # { "_id"    : ObjectId("4be97203715dd2c4be000007"),
  #   "_class" : "Circle",
  #   "x"      : 1,
  #   "y"      : 1,
  #   "color"  : null,
  #   "radius" : 1 }

  all_shapes = Shape.find # Returns a criteria object. It will execute the query and instance the objects once you iterate over it

  all_shapes.to_a
  # Returns all the shapes; notice they are of different classes:
  # [ #<Shape x: 0.0, y: 5.0, color: nil, name: "Point", _id: {"$oid"=>"4be97178715dd2c4be000006"}>,
  #   #<Circle x: 1.0, y: 1.0, color: nil, radius: 1.0, _id: {"$oid"=>"4be97293715dd2c4be000008"}> ]

In fact, you can instanciate any document stored as a hash to the appropiate class. The document just need
to have the attribute "_class" set to the name of the class you want to use as the object type. Example:

  MongoODM.instanciate({ :x => 12, :y => 5, '_class' => 'Circle' })

  # Returns:
  # #<Circle x: 12.0, y: 5.0, color: nil, radius: 1.0>

And because any query method returns a MongoODM::Criteria object, you can concatenate them to nest several conditions (like if they were ActiveRecord scopes):

  Shape.find(:radius => 1).find({}, {:sort => [:color, :asc]}) # Returns a criteria object. Once you iterate over it, it will run a query with both the :radius selector and :sort order.
  
You can also define your own class methods that returns criteria objects, and concatenate them to obtain a single criteria with all the conditions merged in the calls order:

  class Shape
    def self.with_radius(n)
      find(:radius => n)
    end
    
    def self.ordered_by_color
      find({}, {:sort => [:color, :asc]})
    end
  end
  
  Shape.with_radius(1).ordered_by_color # Returns the same criteria than the previous example

Take a look at the Mongo Ruby driver documentation for the 'find' method to see the available options:

http://api.mongodb.org/ruby/1.0.8/Mongo/Collection.html#find-instance_method

= Collections

By default, mongo_odm stores data on a collection with the same name than the class, pluralized. In case of class inheritance, it uses the name of the parent class. You can override this behavior by setting a different collection for a class:

  class Shape
    set_collection 'my_shapes'
  end
  
Alternatively, you can pass a MongoODM::Collection instance to set_collection, to indicate not only a collection name, but also a different connection and/or database:

  class Shape
    set_collection MongoODM::Collection.new(MongoODM.connection.db('another_database'), 'my_shapes')
  end

= Associations

To embed just one copy of another class, just define the field type of that class. The class just need to respond to the "type_cast" class method and the "to_mongo" instance method. Example:

  class RGB
    def initialize(r, g, b)
      @r, @g, @b = r, g, b
    end
    
    def inspect
      "RGB(#{@r},#{@g},#{@b})"
    end
    
    def to_mongo
      [@r, @g, @b]
    end
    
    def self.type_cast(value)
      return nil if value.nil?
      return value if value.is_a?(RGB)
      return new(value[0], value[1], value[2]) if value.is_a?(Array)
    end
  end

  class Color
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :name
    field :rgb, RGB
    
    create_index :name, :unique => true
  end
  
  color = Color.new(:name => "red", :rgb => RGB.new(255,0,0))
  color.save
  
  # Saves:
  # {"_class":"Color","name":"red","rgb":[255,0,0],"_id":{"$oid": "4bf070fb715dd271c2000001"}}

  red = Color.find({:name => "red"}).first
  
  # Returns:
  # #<Color name: "red", rgb: RGB(255,0,0), _id: {"$oid"=>"4bf070fb715dd271c2000001"}>
  

Of course, if the embedded object's class includes the MongoODM::Document module, you don't need to
define those methods. Just define the field as that class:

  class RGB
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :r, Fixnum
    field :g, Fixnum
    field :b, Fixnum
  end

  class Color
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :name
    field :rgb, RGB
  end
  
  color = Color.new(:name => "red", :rgb => RGB.new(:r => 255, :g => 0, :b => 0))
  color.save
  
  # Saves:
  # {"_class":"Color","name":"red","rgb":{"_class":"RGB","r":255,"g":0,"b":0},"_id":{"$oid": "4bf073e3715dd27212000001"}}

  red = Color.find({:name => "red"}).first
  
  # Returns:
  # #<Color name: "red", rgb: #<RGB r: 255, g: 0, b: 0>, _id: {"$oid"=>"4bf073e3715dd27212000001"}>


If you want to save a collection of objects, just define the field as an Array. You can even store objects of different types!

  class Shape
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :x, Float
    field :y, Float
  end
  
  class Circle < Shape
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :radius, Float
  end
  
  class Line < Shape
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :dx, Float
    field :dy, Float
  end

  class Draw
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :objects, Array
  end

  circle1 = Circle.new(:x => 1, :y => 1, :radius => 10)
  circle2 = Circle.new(:x => 2, :y => 2, :radius => 20)
  line = Line.new(:x => 0, :y => 0, :dx => 10, :dy => 5)

  draw = Draw.new(:objects => [circle1, line, circle2])
  draw.save
  
  # Saves:
  # { "_class" : "Draw",
  #   "objects" : [ { "_class" : "Circle",
  #                   "x" : 1.0,
  #                   "y" : 1.0,
  #                   "color" : null,
  #                   "radius" : 10.0 },
  #                 { "_class" : "Line",
  #                   "x" : 0.0,
  #                   "y" : 0.0,
  #                   "color" : null,
  #                   "dx" : 10.0,
  #                   "dy" : 5.0},
  #                 { "_class" : "Circle",
  #                   "x" : 2.0,
  #                   "y" : 2.0,
  #                   "color" : null,
  #                   "radius" : 20.0 } ],
  #   "_id":{"$oid": "4bf0775d715dd2725a000001"}}

  Draw.find_one
  
  # Returns
  # #<Draw objects: [#<Circle x: 1.0, y: 1.0, color: nil, radius: 10.0>, #<Line x: 0.0, y: 0.0, color: nil, dx: 10.0, dy: 5.0>, #<Circle x: 2.0, y: 2.0, color: nil, radius: 20.0>], _id: {"$oid"=>"4bf0775d715dd2725a000001"}>


To reference the associated objects instead of embed them, for now you need to define your own methods. Example:

  class Flag
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :colors_ids, Array
    
    def colors
      Color.find(:_id => {'$in' => colors_ids})
    end
  end

  class Color
    include MongoODM::Document
    field :name
  end

  Color.new(:name => "red").save
  Color.new(:name => "green").save

  flag = Flag.new(:colors_ids => [ Color.find_one(:name => "red").id, Color.find_one(:name => "green").id ])
  flag.save

  # Saves:
  # { "_id"        : ObjectId("4be96c15715dd2c4be000003"),
  #   "_class"     : "Flag",
  #   "colors_ids" : [ ObjectId("4be96bfe715dd2c4be000001"), ObjectId("4be96c08715dd2c4be000002") ]
  # }
  
  flag.colors
  
  # Returns a criteria object that wraps a cursor
  
  flag.colors.to_a
  
  # Returns:
  # [#<Color name: "red", _id: {"$oid"=>"4be96bfe715dd2c4be000001"}>, #<Color name: "green", _id: {"$oid"=>"4be96c08715dd2c4be000002"}>]

= Callbacks

For now, the available callbacks are: after_initialize, before_save, after_save

Example:

  class User
    include MongoODM::Document

    field :encrypted_password
    attr_accessor :password
    
    before_save :encrypt_password
    
    def encrypt_password
      return if self.password.blank?
      self.encrypted_password = encrypt(password)
    end
    protected :encrypt_password
  end

= Validations

All the validation methods defined in ActiveModel::Validations are included

Example:

  class User
    field :email
    
    validates_presence_of :email
    validates_uniqueness_of :email, :case_sensitive => false
    validates_format_of :email, :with => /^([a-zA-Z0-9_\.\-\+])+\@(([a-zA-Z0-9\-])+\.)+([a-zA-Z0-9]{2,4})+$/
  end

= Dirty

All the dirty object methods defined in ActiveModel::Dirty are included

Example:

  class User
    field :email
  end
  
  user = User.new
  user.email = "hello@h1labs.com"
  user.email_changed? # Returns true
  user.email_change # Returns [nil, "hello@h1labs.com"]
  user.changes # Returns {"email" => [nil, "hello@h1labs.com"]}

= TODO

 * Support join of different concatenated find calls to a single criteria object
 * Add helpers to define attributes as referenced objects
 * Allow to specify different database connections with each document definition
 * Increase rspec coverage
 * Document, document, document!
 * Create useful modules to make common operations easier (versioning, localization, etc)

= More

For now, take a look at the Mongo Ruby driver syntax:

http://api.mongodb.org/ruby/1.0.8/index.html

= Copyright

Copyright © 2010 Carlos Paramio. See LICENSE for details.

= Credits

Carlos Paramio

http://h1labs.com